calculation-fundamentals.md, before:

# Chapter 2

Basic physics and mathematics of energy



<!-- look at toolkits for examples
come up with exercises for the class
that will be turned in at the end
-->

## Learning Objectives
- You will learn to use quantitative tools to express energy


## Guiding Questions
- How do we express very large and very small numbers?
- How can we make estimates with very little information?

## Scientific Notation
- Allows us to compactly write very large or very small numbers

## A very large number
- Avogadro's Number
- $$6.02 \times 10^{23}$$
- $$10^{1}$$ = 10
- $$10^{2} = 10 \times 10$$
- $$10^{3} = 10 \times 10 \times 10$$

## A very small number
- Gravitational Constant
- $$6.67 \times 10^{-11} (m^3 kg^{-1} s^{-2})$$
- $$10^{-1} = \frac{1}{10}$$
- $$10^{-2} = \frac{1}{10 \times 10}$$
- $$10^{-3} = \frac{1}{10 \times 10 \times 10}$$

<!--
http://cshsyear10maths.global2.vic.edu.au/files/2008/08/standard-form-table.png
-->

<!-- name some common units using these prefixes -->

## Operations
- Addition
- Subtraction
- Multiplication
- Division

## Scale of energy quantities
![](../figures/ipcc_energy_primer.png)
- from IPCC Energy Primer

## Energy Units
- Joule
    - SI Unit.  One Newton-Meter.
- Kilowatt-Hour
    - Energy consumed by 1 kW load over one hour
- Calorie
    - Energy to heat one gram of water one degree Celsius
- Kilo-calorie
    - One thousand calories.  Used in food energy content.
- British Thermal Unit (BTU)
    - Energy to heat one pound of water by one degree Fahrenheit
- Quad
    - One quadrillion ($10^{15}$) BTU

## Unit Conversions
- We may wish to compare energy units that are not consistent
- Often you can look up conversions in a table
- Other times you may need to recreate the conversion


## Back of the Envelope Calculations
- Construct a model of appropriate complexity
- Gather estimates of necessary quantities
- Calculate estimate
- Evaluate for feasibility

## Exercise
- Estimate the yearly use of gasoline in the US
- What is our strategy?

## Exercise
- How many gallons do you consume?
- How many persons in the US?


# Performing computations

While we want to develop our intuition when we are estimating with large
numbers, performing accurate calculations is also important.  You will
be able to calculate these numbers on a hand-held calculator, in Excel,
and using scientific computing platforms like Python or Julia.

Since our calculations are often used as evidence to support an
argument, they must be easy to read and have clear methods and
assumptions.  Using a computer to preserve the details of the
calculation is often preferable to using a calculator.

## Basic computations

- Addition (+)
- Subtraction (-)
- Multiplication (*)
- Division (/)
- Exponentiation (^ or **)

To perform basic calculations with numbers, we can type numbers into the
computer and use the symbols above to perform the calculation.

## Variables

To make the details of a computation more clear, we can use readable
names for our numbers and then use the names in the calculation.

    power = 100
    time = 30
    energy = power * time

This makes the intention of the calculation more clear to the reader.

## Scientific Notation

$$6 \cdot 10^3$$ is entered as ``6E3``.

## Units

Computation of physical quantities often relies on the human to define
and use a consistent set of units of measurement.  There are tools that
allow us to add physical quantities to our calculations, but they are
not as rich as I could like them to be.  One good practice is to
explicitly include the unit name in the variable name.

    power_watt = 100
    time_sec = 30
    energy_joule = power_watt * time_sec

<!-- excel has custom formats for units? -->

## Defining Functions

![thermo](heat_engine_vector.png)

Commit message:

new round of edits to align with syllabus

calculation-fundamentals.md, after:

# Calculation Fundamentals

In order to make quantitative estimates of our energy needs and impacts,
we must extend our mathematics with new tools and techniques.

- scientific notation
- units and physical quantities
- computational tools for documenting calculations


<!-- get stuff from 202 -->


<!-- look at toolkits for examples
come up with exercises for the class
that will be turned in at the end
-->

## Learning Objectives
- You will learn to use quantitative tools to express energy


## Guiding Questions
- How do we express very large and very small numbers?
- How can we make estimates with very little information?

## Scientific Notation
- Allows us to compactly write very large or very small numbers

## A very large number
- Avogadro's Number
- $$6.02 \times 10^{23}$$
- $$10^{1}$$ = 10
- $$10^{2} = 10 \times 10$$
- $$10^{3} = 10 \times 10 \times 10$$

## A very small number
- Gravitational Constant
- $$6.67 \times 10^{-11} (m^3 kg^{-1} s^{-2})$$
- $$10^{-1} = \frac{1}{10}$$
- $$10^{-2} = \frac{1}{10 \times 10}$$
- $$10^{-3} = \frac{1}{10 \times 10 \times 10}$$

<!--
http://cshsyear10maths.global2.vic.edu.au/files/2008/08/standard-form-table.png
-->

<!-- name some common units using these prefixes -->

## Operations
- Addition
- Subtraction
- Multiplication
- Division

## Scale of energy quantities
![](../figures/ipcc_energy_primer.png)
- from IPCC Energy Primer

## Energy Units
- Joule
    - SI Unit.  One Newton-Meter.
- Kilowatt-Hour
    - Energy consumed by 1 kW load over one hour
- Calorie
    - Energy to heat one gram of water one degree Celsius
- Kilo-calorie
    - One thousand calories.  Used in food energy content.
- British Thermal Unit (BTU)
    - Energy to heat one pound of water by one degree Fahrenheit
- Quad
    - One quadrillion ($10^{15}$) BTU

## Unit Conversions
- We may wish to compare energy units that are not consistent
- Often you can look up conversions in a table
- Other times you may need to recreate the conversion


## Back of the Envelope Calculations
- Construct a model of appropriate complexity
- Gather estimates of necessary quantities
- Calculate estimate
- Evaluate for feasibility

## Exercise
- Estimate the yearly use of gasoline in the US
- What is our strategy?

## Exercise
- How many gallons do you consume?
- How many persons in the US?


# Performing computations

While we want to develop our intuition when we are estimating with large
numbers, performing accurate calculations is also important.  You will
be able to calculate these numbers on a hand-held calculator, in Excel,
and using scientific computing platforms like Python or Julia.

Since our calculations are often used as evidence to support an
argument, they must be easy to read and have clear methods and
assumptions.  Using a computer to preserve the details of the
calculation is often preferable to using a calculator.

## Basic computations

- Addition (+)
- Subtraction (-)
- Multiplication (*)
- Division (/)
- Exponentiation (^ or **)

To perform basic calculations with numbers, we can type numbers into the
computer and use the symbols above to perform the calculation.

## Variables

To make the details of a computation more clear, we can use readable
names for our numbers and then use the names in the calculation.

    power = 100
    time = 30
    energy = power * time

This makes the intention of the calculation more clear to the reader.

## Scientific Notation

$$6 \cdot 10^3$$ is entered as ``6E3``.

## Units

Computation of physical quantities often relies on the human to define
and use a consistent set of units of measurement.  There are tools that
allow us to add physical quantities to our calculations, but they are
not as rich as I could like them to be.  One good practice is to
explicitly include the unit name in the variable name.

    power_watt = 100
    time_sec = 30
    energy_joule = power_watt * time_sec

<!-- excel has custom formats for units? -->

## Defining Functions

![thermo](heat_engine_vector.png)
